Oct 19: What are your passions?

	I don't know if I’m really passionate about anything, at least to the extent of others. I really enjoy playing lacrosse, coding, football, and music, but I wouldn't really call those passions in the way that Frankenstein had a passion for reanimation. I guess a better way to put it is I enjoy doing these things but I don't really have any ambition to pursue them. I would be content doing them for the rest of life as side hobbies, but couldn’t see myself dedicating my life to any of them.


Oct 20: What do parents owe their children?

	I think on a very basic level parents owe their children food, water, shelter, and love/care. These are the things that are required for the kid to grow up healthy and at least somewhat happy. On a deeper level though things like friendship, being or at least pretending to be interested in the things the kid enjoys, and things that are less important to their health, but are important to their mental wellbeing. What I think is more interesting is what do the kids owe back to their parents. I think the parents entered into the relationship, they brought you into this world so you don't owe them anything, at least at first. When the parent has given the bare minimum, the kid doesn't really owe them anything. But, when the parents have made the effort to extend the relationship to being more than just parents but to friends you owe them more.


Nov 29: What dialect do you speak? How much do you code switch?

	I think my dialect is probably the same as the average teenage boy, I use slang, I use pretty simple words most of the time, and I talk in simple sentences usually. I’m not sure if I really have an accent.
	When it comes to code switching I think the time I do it the most is just when talking to adults vs kids. When I get home I will use less slang that I think my parents won't understand, but for the most part I talk the same. For adults that I’m less close with I will usually talk with very little slang and try to sound a little smarter. There are also times when I’m talking to certain friends, when I will talk even more like a teenager. I also notice that I don't really switch my clothing when it comes to going somewhere fancy/nice.


Jan 25: What did you think of Adichie's TED talk?
How does it show up in USA
How does it up in your life
Discuss a single story of yours, are there other stories that don't get told
	I thought Adichie's TED talk was really interesting because it pointed out something that seems obvious but you don't really notice when it happens. For example when shes talking about her roomate assumed she didn't know how to use a stove seems obviously stupid and offensive. However, if you've gone your whole  life being told the single story that people in Africa are all very poor, don't have electricity, and have completely different music of course you are going to assume those things when meeting someone from there. I think things like these are very prominent in the USA because so much of our understanding of the world is from 


Feb 22: What are the goals in terms of raising a child? What does a child need to attain these goals

	I think on a basic level the goals of raising a child are keeping them alive, healthy, and happy. On a deeper level they should be raised to have critical thinking skills, be able to socialize, have some level of emotional intelligence, not have any trauma, and the skills to be whatever the kid wants to be as an adult. I think for a child to attain these goals they need to have supportive guardians who allow them freedom while still protecting their safety. A kid should be able to express their feelings to their guardians and try new things and meet new people without fear of punishments. I think the goal for a child should never be specific for a guardian. 